Welcome to session 403 regarding
the Mac OS X installer application.
My name is Jean-Pierre Ciudaad,
and I work at Apple in the
installation and setup group.
We write applications like
the installer application,
the software update application,
and the setup assistant,
which is the first application
you see after installing the
OS once you reboot the machine.
First, I have a question for you.
How many of you are familiar with
creating installation packages?
Okay, maybe 60%, 70%. So,
for those of you who are not
familiar with creating packages,
I'm gonna start by giving you an
overview of what are the options
available for you on Mac OS X.
For those of you who are familiar,
after the overview,
we'll talk about some of the
new and updated features that
we are bringing to you in Tiger.
Most importantly,
we'll talk about installation
plugins and distributions.
Then we'll talk about how you can
create compatible packages that will
install all the way from 10.1 to Tiger.
And at the end we'll talk about
where you can find some more
documentation about all these things.
There are two types of installations
that are available to you on Mac OS X.
The first one, drag and drop installs.
This is the simplest way to deliver
your application to your users.
In addition to that,
Apple also provides you with
an application called Package
Maker to create packages and the
installer application to install
them on the user's machine.
So let's start with drag and drop.
What are the advantages?
Well,
the advantages to users are obvious.
It's only one file,
one application bundle that your
user can just drag to wherever
he wants in the file system.
It's very simple to install.
It's also very easy to remove.
The user can just grab the application
bundle and drag it to the trash.
The advantages for you:
there is absolutely no complex
installation instructions to write.
It's a very simple process.
[Transcript missing]
Your application will
need to handle any README,
any license agreement.
It will also have to check for proper
configuration when it's launched.
Again, you have no way to do
additional checking.
[Transcript missing]
So you may have noticed that one of the
first panel that you see in the setup
assistant is a migration panel that asks
you if you want to migrate from another
machine or from another partition.
When we do this migration,
we do not carry over files that
were installed into Slash system.
Or to be more precise, we do it,
but we do it on a case-for-case basis.
So if we don't know about your file,
it will not be migrated.
So you may have noticed that one of the
first panel that you see in the setup
assistant is a migration panel that asks
you if you want to migrate from another
machine or from another partition.
If your application needs to
restart or needs a logout,
we will ask the user to
restart or to logout.
We will also do the optimizing system
performance section of the installer,
which is we will run the pre-binding
tool to pre-bind your executable.
If you're installing an application,
we will register it with Launch Services,
and we will also allow you to provide
some customizable parts of the UI,
namely the welcome panel,
the background image,
and a localized readme
or license agreement.
So, how do you, sorry,
what is an installer package?
So first and foremost,
an installer package contains the
files that you want to install.
This is what we call the payload.
The payload is just a Pax archive.
In addition to that,
a package bundle contains a catalog.
The catalog is a bill of materials.
It's an index list of the files
that are contained in your archive.
In addition to that,
you provide a description file
that gives us the title and
the description of the package.
Also, you provide some flags that
tells us how to behave.
Do you want an authorization
and things like that?
Do you want to follow sim links?
Then you also provide all the
UI parts of the installation process,
the background image, the readme,
the license agreement,
the welcome screen.
You also provide the check tools that
will check the system to make sure
that your package can be installed on,
and same thing for the volume,
the installation check
and volume check tool.
And then you provide a collection
of scripts that you may want to be
run before you install the files
or after you install the files.
We make a difference between pre-install
and pre-upgrade depending if you're
doing an upgrade or an install,
obviously.
Now you can create as
many packages as you want,
and then you can group them together
in the UI by using a meta package.
An installer meta package structure
is very similar to a package,
except that it does not
contain any payload.
Its only purpose is to group
things together in the UI.
The way you list those packages,
the packages that belong
to this meta package,
is by adding a key in the Info.plist that
will contain the list of packages.
Now, a meta package also
contains some UI sections,
the check tools,
and the different scripts.
So how do you create a package?
You create a package using Packagemaker.
Packagemaker is installed on your
system as part of the Xcode tools.
It's installed in developer
application utilities,
and you can run Packagemaker
as an application,
or you can also run it as a
command line tool that you can
include in your build scripts.
As it is today, on your CD,
on the Tiger CD that you have,
the PackageMaker is a very simple
version of the application.
It only creates very simple packages.
You will most likely have to go and
edit the files that get created in
order to support some of the more
advanced features of the installer.
However,
we are actively working on PackageMaker,
and we really hope to deliver
to you a much better application
of PackageMaker for GM.
So in Packagemaker, you provide the root
directory of your software,
you specify the different installation
flags that you want to use,
and you give us the name of your package,
the description, and then the location of
all the additional files,
like the readme, the license agreement,
etc.
On output,
Packagemaker will create a package,
a .pkg bundle,
that you will distribute to your users.
That package will be installed on the
user's machine using the Apple installer,
which is located in
Application Utilities.
The installer has been shipping in
every single version of Mac OS X.
It's always available.
Users are familiar with it.
It's very easy to use.
So now I would like to
introduce you to Jack Matthew,
the field shearer of installation.
and he's also the person at
Apple who made a career out of
creating installer packages.
Jack?
Thanks a lot, Jean-Pierre.
My car isn't nice as Phil's.
I drive a Toyota,
so not quite as -- not quite Phil.
So as Jean-Pierre mentioned,
PackageMaker is a really
simple application.
The things that you need in
order to use PackageMaker are,
first of all, a root,
and you can think of this as slash.
And let's just take a
look at our root here.
Oops.
And
So our root contains applications
and then our application.
And one of the reasons we might want
to use a package based installer
is because we're installing more
than one thing on the file system,
otherwise we'd want
to use a drag install.
So we also install something
into library application support.
So in addition to the root,
we also have this
package resources folder.
And it contains, let's say,
a post processing script
that we would want to run.
It also includes Lproj folders that
contain our localized resources.
So in this case,
I've got an English readme.
And in honor of Jean-Pierre,
we've got a French Lproj,
the French readme.
And so now we can begin
actually making our package.
So let's go ahead and
launch PackageMaker.
Really simple UI.
So title, let's call it My Application.
Oops.
Version 1.0.
And description.
Description is what appears in
custom install if this package is
included as part of a meta package.
This is good.
OK.
So files.
This is where we select our route.
So where is that?
I've got it right here.
There's our route.
Resources.
Here are the resources.
and Info, this is where you can set up
some of the meta install flags.
In this particular case,
we're installing an application and
something into application support.
So you're going to want
to have admin privileges,
otherwise it's not going to work
if you have a really restricted
user that's running the package.
So that's actually all there is to it.
So let's go ahead and create
package and we'll call it.
MyApp.pkg.
And we'll go ahead and
put that on the desktop.
Ta-da, that's it.
So we can go ahead and
launch the package.
That's all there is to it.
And I'm going to turn the
stage back over to Jean-Pierre.
Thank you, Jack.
So this is very simple.
You know, there's not much to it.
This is very useful.
So now I would like to talk
to you about our new features.
So first,
where do we get ideas for new features?
Well, we mostly get them from you.
You send us feedback,
we meet you at WWDC, you report bugs.
Often they're more announcements
requests than bugs,
and sometimes they are real new features,
and we listen to what you have to say.
We also listen to people like Jack,
who create packages at Apple,
who create packages for
DOS and also for applications.
They are a great source
of information for us,
and we are,
please keep the feedback coming.
So what have we done in Tiger?
So here are some of the new features
that might be of interest for you.
File version checking.
Some of you may be familiar
with bundle version checking,
which is what prevents the installer
from overriding a newer version
of a bundle on the user's disk.
We have extended that to files.
The reason for that is because some
files are not part of a bundle.
Things like fonts, for example.
And currently what our installer
would be doing is that it would
just go and install an older version
of the font over a newer one.
So this is bad,
so we decided to address that.
It works in a very simple way.
For every file that you want to check,
we give you a hook where you
can provide your own tool and
basically tell us whether or
not the file should be replaced.
We are gonna provide some standard ways,
some standard version
checks for some files.
Multiple CD installations.
That's a request that we heard
last year that a lot of people
wanted to be able to actually,
they wanted the installer to be able to
handle multiple CDs or multiple DVDs,
so we now have implemented that.
It will be available through
distribution scripts.
You will hear about distributions later.
Minimum UI Installation.
So this is in order to provide a
better solution for automated installs.
We now allow the package writer
to specify if some panels in
the installer should be skipped.
We also provide, for some of the panels,
we provide a minimal UI,
which means that we do not force
the user to always answer a
question in the installer panel.
We can assume certain replies.
So it's useful for automated install.
It will also be available
through distribution scripts.
Application selection.
One of the panels that you have in the
installer today is target selection,
where we list all the volumes
that you have on your machine.
This is great when
you're installing the OS,
but really when you deliver a new
version of your application to the user,
you want to upgrade the existing one.
So what application selection is,
is a replacement for volume selection.
Instead of disk,
you will see older versions of your
application on the user's machine,
and the user can say,
this is the one I want to upgrade.
And then we have two more features
that I would like to call,
two more features that I would
like to go into more details.
And for that, I'm going to call two
engineers in my team.
And we're going to start with plugins,
installer plugins,
and I would like to call Chris Ryan.
Thank you, Jean-Pierre.
So, I'm going to talk--my name is
Christopher Ryan and I work on
the setup and installation team,
and I'm going to talk
about installer plug-ins.
So--oh.
Installer Plugins.
So, I'm going to talk about why
we have installer plugins,
what they are and how they're used,
how to create an installer plugin,
some requirements,
when they should be used and
when they shouldn't be used,
as well as some demos.
So let's get started.
Why do we have installer plugins?
So as Jean-Pierre mentioned,
there are many ways to customize
your installer's experience.
You have a readme, a license,
a welcome panel,
as well as a custom background.
But we've been hearing requests from
many developers that you want to do more.
You want to do things
we haven't thought of.
You want registration, serialization,
maybe even a summary or conclusion
at the end of the install.
And so we're going to provide you some
plugin support so you can do this.
So what are they?
They are a customizable
section in the installer,
similar to how you see the README and
license and the target select panels.
They're provided by developers inside
your packages or distributions.
They are loadable code,
which can have nibs as well
as other resources you need.
But to best show you these plug-ins,
we're going to bring Jack Matthew up
to show you a quick demo.
Jack.
Thanks a lot, Chris.
So again, this is just best seen.
So let's go ahead and launch
a package that is using a
couple of custom plug-ins.
So the first thing you might
notice here is on the left,
there's some more stuff.
So,
Let's just go ahead and continue
on to one of these custom plugins.
Here's a registration plugin.
This is what we call a section,
and we're going to go into
more details in a moment.
But let's go ahead and fill this out.
and then we're going to enter our serial
number and you might notice that the
continue button is grayed out until we
enter our extremely secure product key.
and then we're going to enter our serial
number and you might notice that the
continue button is grayed out until we
enter our extremely secure product key.
and incidentally your various
plugins can talk to each other
through a shared dictionary.
Here we go.
And we're done.
Yay!
And look at this.
This is an example of a
late breaking news plugin.
You might want to just give
someone the latest information
off of your own webpage.
This is just something we were
able to make really quick.
So you'll see over here, breaking news.
and Casey didn't notice the
installer window is resizable now,
which is nice.
That is a package with
two custom plugins.
Back over to Chris.
Thank you, Jack.
So as you can see, you can customize the
installer's experience.
How do we do this?
So we have an Xcode
template now in Tiger,
which will create a very basic
plugin you can use to extend.
We have a new framework called
the installer plugins framework,
which contains two new
concepts that Jack alluded to,
the installer section and installer pane.
I'm going to go over those in a second.
So here's the window that you saw
that Jack showed on the screen
with the late breaking news plugin.
Each plugin contains one section.
So here's the registration section.
It's provided by the registration plugin.
It also contains two panes.
and the Late Breaking News section
contains one pane,
so you can have one or
more panes per section.
In an installer section,
you can customize a few things.
One is the title.
This can be either dynamic or static,
so you can decide the title at runtime.
You can also decide whether to
actually show the section or not.
For registration, for example,
you may not want to show the
registration section if your product
is already registered on that machine.
Also, you can decide the panel ordering
at runtime from your section.
So here's the example
registration section,
and the title, which you can customize,
is highlighted.
How do we do this?
You can customize the title of
your installer section using
the installer section title
key in your Info.plist file.
And this is localized using
the Info.plist.strings file.
Also, you can do this at runtime by using
the installer section's title method
in the installer section subclass.
And to subclass an installer section,
you need to provide the
NSPrincipleClass key in your
Info.plist so the installer knows exactly
which installer section class to load.
And then we also have a very
important method called shouldLoad,
which allows you to decide at
runtime whether your section should
load in the installer's UI or not.
So here's a quick example
of the shouldLoad method.
In this example,
we have a section that should only run
on a machine with one gigabyte of memory.
So as you notice,
you can use syscontrol or any other
system libraries to decide whether
your section should load or not.
And it checks for one gigabyte of memory,
and if there's one gigabyte of memory,
it returns yes.
The installer will load
the section automatically.
Otherwise, it's not loaded.
The real meat is the view and
what you see on the screen.
So you can customize this
using an installer pane.
The installer pane provides a title,
just shown here at the top.
Provides the content view.
and other developers are also here.
We will also be talking
about the Mac OS X installer.
[Transcript missing]
and there are also some
entering and exit methods,
will enter, will exit, did enter,
did exit,
as well as a very important should exit
method which gets called when the user
clicks the continue or go back button on
your pane so you can decide whether you
want to exit the pane or not at run time.
So here's an example of that.
So in this example,
you may want to warn the user
that they have to--that they might
have--we might have to send their
registration over the internet.
And so when the user
clicks the continue button,
we're we're going to
The installer is going to call the
should exit pane method on your pane,
and you're going to return no and
show an alert warning them that we're
going to send their registration.
And when the alert's complete,
there's the installer pane's
go to next pane method,
which you call to
advance to the next pane.
The installer is going to call the
should exit pane method on your pane,
and you're going to return no and
show an alert warning them that we're
going to send their registration.
And when the alert's complete,
there's the installer pane's
go to next pane method,
which you call to
advance to the next pane.
Each of the installer sections
are installer plugins.
So let's show you how
to create one of these.
Jack?
[Transcript missing]
Each of the installer sections
are installer plugins.
So, let's show you how to
create one of these.
Jack?
[Transcript missing]
I'm going to go ahead
and paste in this code.
And this is going to, believe it or not,
just going to make us a very, very,
very simple, basic plugin.
This is the should exit pane
method that Chris mentioned.
This is going to get called by
the installer when you click
the continue or go back button.
And we're going to use this to present a
goodbye message before the user actually
is able to go to the next plugin.
So we'll go ahead and save that.
And then we're also going to go into
the nib and add some hello world text.
OK, so here's our content view.
Save.
And let's go ahead and build it,
see what happens.
Okay, and I believe we are done.
So let's look at,
I've got a package ready to
go here to take our plugin.
Just copy this to the desktop in case.
Okay, show package contents.
and here's the contents folder.
Now you're going to need to create
a plugins folder inside of contents.
So, as Chris mentioned,
it's going to need to contain two things.
The first is, of course,
your plugin bundle that you've built.
The other thing is the
installer section's plist file,
and that determines the order
of your plugin relative to the
[Transcript missing]
Here's our bundle.
And that should be it.
Now let's go ahead and double click
our package and see what happens.
Now I didn't change the
installer section's plist file,
but if we wanted to have
our hello world be first,
we would have done that and
we could have made it first.
Can you read me?
And there you go.
And so let's try to click
continue and goodbye.
And that is a simple plugin.
Thank you, Jack.
As you can see,
it's pretty easy to create
an installer plugin.
So, some of the requirements and
restrictions on these plugins.
First of all, installer plugins are
only available on Tiger.
So if you make a package and
you include an installer plugin,
these plugins will be
ignored on previous builds.
What this means is that you shouldn't
rely on your plugins for serialization
of your application or for registration.
You should use this as a helper to
get the best user experience for your
customers while they're installing.
Also,
it's important to note that now we have
a new feature in the installer in Tiger,
which is multiple CD or
disc DVD installs.
And with this,
that means that your plugin's resources
may not be available at all times.
So it's very important that
your plugins do not access their
resources or data while they are
not currently active or not being,
methods aren't being called from
the installer on your plugins.
So with that, I'm going to hand it
over to Peter Bierman,
who's going to talk about
distribution scripts.
Peter?
- Thank you, Chris.
I'm Peter Bierman.
I work on the installer team
with Chris and Jean-Pierre
and some other people.
I'm gonna be talking about
distribution scripts,
another new feature we have in Tiger.
Pretty excited about this.
It's gonna give us
some cool new features.
So distribution scripts are
all about controlling the
installer's user interface.
I spend a lot of my time advising
developers that if they can,
they should use a drag
and drop installer,
but often they can't and
it's because they have a more
complicated piece of software.
Usually as their software
gets more complicated,
they move into using what we
call M packages or meta packages
that Jean-Pierre talked about.
And when you start using meta packages,
it gets to be difficult to
control the installer's UI.
The good thing about using
the installer is that you get
a consistent user experience.
The downside of especially meta
packages is it's hard to create
that consistent user experience.
So here's the diagram of the
installation package that
Jean-Pierre showed you earlier.
As you can see,
there's lots of little files
you have to keep track of.
In particular,
this section in the middle is all
the user interface controlling files.
Lots of flags, lots of keywords,
things that have been
added over the years.
When you start to deal
with meta packages,
you have all the same packages
and all the same flags.
They're just scattered everywhere.
So we've created distribution scripts.
Distribution scripts take all of those
flags and move them into a single file.
Hopefully it makes it easier for
you guys to create your packages,
keep track of how the user
interface is going to look when
the user is using your installer.
So how do we do this?
We're going to use XML and JavaScript.
We've decided to use XML because it's
easy for machines to read and write,
and because we're using
application specific elements,
it can be easy for
humans to read and write.
We're also using JavaScript.
JavaScript looks like C,
but it has a lot of cool
features like garbage collection
and associative arrays.
It makes some things a
lot easier to deal with.
It's also sandboxed inside
of the installer application.
That means it's not going to
be able to do anything else.
So we're going to use the
Mac OS X installer technology and
introduce new top requested features.
We're going to use XML and JavaScript.
We've decided to use XML because it's
easy for machines to read and write,
and because we're using
application specific elements,
it can be easy for
humans to read and write.
We're also using JavaScript.
JavaScript looks like C,
but it has a lot of cool
features like garbage collection
and associative arrays.
It makes some things a
lot easier to deal with.
We're also using XML and
JavaScript because it's easy
for humans to read and write.
It makes some things a
lot easier to deal with.
Well, you'd have a file.
It can be called anything.
We've gotten away from those
package-based file names.
It has to have a .dist extension.
It ends up in the contents subfolder
of your package or mPackage.
And within the
distribution script itself,
any of the strings you use that are
user interface items can actually
be keys for the localized strings
elsewhere in your package bundle.
So let's take a closer look
at distribution scripts.
Here's some of the beginnings of
the distribution script vocabulary.
You can see here there's the first
element is installer GUI script.
This actually is the container
element for all the other elements
used inside the distribution script.
Then we see a title element which within
the title element contains your title,
your package title, and a welcome,
a read me, and license elements.
These use a file attribute to
specify a file located in your
package resources much like there
are flags for these same things in
the current installer package format.
Things get a little
more complicated here.
We have a package reference element.
This has an ID attribute that's used to
refer to the package reference element
elsewhere in the distribution script.
It also has a kilobytes attribute,
which will be used by the installer
UI to show how big your package is,
this particular package.
Finally,
there's a file URL here for where
the installer framework itself
will go and get your package when
it comes down to do installing.
One of the interesting things about
this is what you're seeing here
is the beginnings of the installer
doesn't actually need to look at your
packages to present any of the UI.
It's actually going to try to get
as much of this information from you
up front and then hand your list of
packages to the framework when it's done.
So, when we get to the UI,
we get to the custom install panel,
and things get even more interesting.
Here we see a choices outline element.
This is the beginnings of you
setting up what exactly that custom
install panel should look like.
There's two line elements here.
They refer to two choice
elements named app and extra.
These names can be whatever you want.
The choice element,
the first choice element here,
we've called app.
It has a title.
In this case, it's not localized.
It's just right in the
distribution script.
And it also has within it a
connection to the package ref element
you saw in the previous slide.
And we do that again
with the extras item.
So you put those two together
and we end up with a very
familiar custom install panel.
There's nothing on this screen that
you can't do yourself currently
with packages or mPackages,
but it's a little simpler to
do with distribution scripts.
and we can throw that all together.
Here's the whole thing,
all of them combined.
You can see the various choice elements,
line elements,
how they all are connected to each other.
So that's what you can do
today with a new syntax,
XML file, yeah, it sounds great.
But there's a bunch of cool
new things you can do with it.
For example, you can now attach multiple
packages to any one choice.
You can break up your software in
any way you want and connect the
things to the choices the user sees
in the UI completely separately
from how you package your software.
You can attach the same
package to different choices.
You can have some app support
package that never changes that's
attached to all the various things
that the user could install.
You can show the same choice
in more than one place.
You could create a very creative
custom install UI where you've
got groups of things and,
well, you can use your imagination there.
and you can enable or select
choices based on the user's other
selections inside the customization
panel and the system configuration.
Now, with M packages, you can do this,
but it's difficult.
There are flags and most of it
involves packages ruling themselves
out because they don't like how
the machine's configured or so on.
With distribution scripts,
it's much more explicit.
You have very complete control over
whether a package is enabled or disabled,
selected or deselected.
So how do we do that?
Well, we have these choice elements
I showed you a few seconds ago.
And the choice elements represent
the choices a user can make
inside the customization UI.
The choice elements have
attributes like selected,
enabled, and visible.
And the values of those attributes
can be JavaScript expressions.
So here we see again a very
simple representation of
the custom install panel.
And let's take a closer
look at those two choices.
A very common idiom is for people to
have an app in some dependent package.
Or they want these two things
to be related to each other.
For example, if I deselect the app,
I want the extras to become
deselected and disabled.
So the user can't install the
extras separately from the app.
I reselect the app,
the extras become enabled, et cetera.
So how would we do that
using a distribution script?
Here we see the choices outline again
that just sets up the outline view.
And we see our two choices,
our app and our extras choice.
In the attributes for the extras choice,
we have an enabled attribute
and a selected attribute.
The enabled attribute is
a JavaScript expression.
It's choices.app.selected.
Now that refers back to the app choice
that's in the middle of the screen there.
That choices word there that's
in that JavaScript expression is
actually an object that's provided by
the installer's runtime that allows
you to connect to the attributes
to the choices declared in XML.
These are all the attributes of
the choices are dynamic at runtime,
so when the user checks something,
you can determine whether it's checked,
which one's checked,
whether it's enabled, things like that.
The selected attribute is
a little more complicated.
In this case,
we want the user to only be able to
select it if the app is selected.
So that's that first half of
that and expression there.
The other half of it is
sort of self-referring.
What that means is that
if the app is selected,
the value of the selected
attribute of the extras is equal to
whatever the user wants it to be.
If the user clicks it, it's selected.
If the user unselects it,
it's deselected.
And again,
that choices object is provided
by the installer runtime,
connects you to all the live state
of the various choice elements.
Now, there's a couple other objects that
we provide in the installer runtime,
and I'll talk about those.
So here we have the
JavaScript system object.
This is, again,
provided by the installer's runtime.
It contains a bunch of methods
and static data about the
configuration of the machine.
It lets you inspect that from
your distribution script.
And it's read only.
You can't go into it and change
things about the machine.
You can't say, oh,
the machine has two gigs of RAM now.
That's not going to be possible.
But you can use things like sysctl.
You can get the values out of a
plist anywhere on the file system.
And you can use the I/O registry to
find out if your hardware is connected,
for example.
Here's an example.
We can set up our application
to only be enabled if the
machine has 128 megs of RAM.
Here you see the enabled
attribute of the choice,
of the app choice.
It's connected to a JavaScript function
that we've named has 128 megabytes.
And that function's contained
within a script element.
You can have as many of these
script elements as you'd like
within your distribution script.
And you can put any JavaScript you'd
like inside these script elements.
Here we have a function that
I've written has 128 megs of RAM.
It uses the system.sysctl method to
find out how much physical RAM the
machine has and returns yes or no
depending on whether there's enough.
So that's a pretty quick look at
some of the neat things you can do.
Jack's gonna look at some of the more
advanced things we can do with it.
Jack?
Okay, got the clip on too.
So,
first let's just go ahead and dive into
a package that is using a distribution
script and look at something that
you've never been able to do before.
We're really excited about this.
Okay.
[Transcript missing]
So first off, just going over what
Peter showed you in the slides,
You can do this.
Again, this is a very common idiom.
Say you had a font that needed
to go with your application
and you wanted to provide this
kind of optional install here,
but the font's no good without the app.
Something like that you can do now.
Now, let's look at this.
This is a little more interesting.
You'll notice that I clicked on this,
but you see something happened in here.
- All right.
- So let's go ahead and...
We look at this expanded here and
you'll see that as I click these items,
other items become selected.
Finally we can do stuff like this.
This is great.
So let's look at another example.
and the rest of the team.
So, well this isn't very interesting,
is it?
But let's just go ahead for a moment
and look at the code for this.
This is,
let me introduce you to the first
JavaScript I've ever written,
literally.
This took me minutes to figure out.
It's very, very, very simple.
So we have some standard stuff
in here like has a welcome.rtf.
Okay, fine.
Then we start talking
about here the choices,
the line items that appear in the
custom pane and the custom install UI.
And then we begin to actually accumulate
information about each of these choices
in a few different other XML tags here.
First we're saying here,
here's choice that
we're referring to as A.
It's got a title.
It's called Nifty Application.
Then we have a choice called B.
B has a title as well.
And we're saying that it's enabled.
You can select this package.
But here's another
interesting field here,
Start Selected.
What is the default selection
state of this choice?
Well, it's a function.
So what does this function do?
Well, we've gone and embedded some
JavaScript here inside of this XML tag.
Has cookie.
So say you wanted to,
say your application goes
and lays down a cookie file,
and then on subsequent
use of an installer,
you don't want to present
that option by default.
So on easy install,
a more reasonable thing happens.
So, simply here, I go ahead and use the
built-in system object,
system, files, file exists at path,
and then I give it a path.
So, let's go ahead and, for fun,
go ahead and create that path.
Permission denied.
I've been denied.
We have our ways.
Oh.
- Uh oh.
- Perhaps we don't.
Okay.
Well, I assure you that if I had
successfully authorized here,
that upon second launch of that package,
we would have seen that by default,
that optional item would
have been deselected.
So that is a quick demo
of distribution scripts.
And I'm going to hand the
stage back over to Peter.
Thanks Jack.
We actually tried a lot of this stuff
earlier today and something's got to go
wrong during the actual presentation,
so there you have it.
So if you do these, if you work on these,
there's a couple things
you should watch out for.
Both XML and JavaScript are
case sensitive.
If you run into some mysterious problems,
you're confused,
try using user bin XML lint.
It's included in the system.
It'll look through your XML,
point out any problems you have,
missing characters, missing slashes,
things like that.
One of the most common things you have to
watch out for is there's five characters
you have to escape in all XML documents.
That's the left and right angle brackets.
The single and double
quote and the ampersand.
If you decide to write some
software or some scripts to
create distribution scripts for
you instead of doing them by hand,
you can use a function
such as the CF function,
CFXML,
create string by escaping entities.
That's a mouthful.
But beware,
that function has a bug in 10.3.
It doesn't make it very useful,
but it is fixed in the tiger
build that you all have.
You can also use similar functions
in your favorite scripting languages.
So, distribution scripts.
This was just a teaser.
We hope to, by the GM version of Tiger,
have what we're going to call a
package translator that will look
at your existing M packages and
build you a distribution script so
you'll have something to start with.
There's also a session download that's
available on connect.apple.com for this
session that includes a documentation,
a test app to play with distributions,
and some sample distribution scripts.
Unfortunately,
the installer that is in the Tiger build
that you all have doesn't currently
deal with distribution scripts.
We're in the process of building them
up and adding more support for them.
So, now's a great time for us to
hear your feedback about it.
It's still under construction.
Please play with it and send your
feedback to installer-dist-feedback
at group.apple.com.
and now the man you've been
listening to all through the session,
Jack, is going to come up and
give his presentation on
building compatible packages.
Jack.
Hello, hello, hello, hello, hello.
Is the mic on?
Okay.
So,
let me formally introduce myself here.
My name is Jack Matthew,
and my team at Apple are Apple's...
Can we get the slides on,
please?
So my team are Apple's
package developers.
We're like you guys.
We work on the OS install,
the OS updates, the iLife applications,
the Pro applications such as Final Cut,
DVD Studio Pro,
a bunch of other little random
small updates like security updates.
We also help keep
software update running.
And we work on the
Windows installers as well.
So I'm here to talk about compatibility.
We've seen some really great
new features here today,
but if you're like us,
you have to deliver software to
people that have older machines.
So let me just go over what
I'm gonna talk about here.
First of all,
making packages that work with
both 10.1 as well as Tiger.
We're going to talk about some
of the things that have happened
to the package format over time,
go over some features that you
may or may not be aware of.
We're going to talk about if your
application or if your package really
must use some of these new features
that we've been talking about here,
that if someone gets a hold
of that on an older system,
that the right thing happens.
And then we're going to talk
about packages that are a
little bit more complicated.
They use things like custom install and
a mixture of some of these new and old
features and kind of how to get the best,
make some compromises,
and deliver something that's going to
work for the maximum number of people.
So, first off, simple packages.
What do I mean by that?
Packages that basically
just install your bits.
Little more than that.
Maybe they run a pre or
post processing script.
So the first thing to understand is that
a package that you built on 10.1 is still
going to run when you launch it on Tiger.
And similarly, if you built your package
using PackageMaker on Tiger,
it's going to run on 10.1.
and if you need a little bit more
functionality in your script,
the installation check and volume
check scripts as well as the pre and
post flight scripts still work in
Tiger and work all the way back to 10.1.
and if you need a little bit more
functionality in your script,
the installation check and volume
check scripts as well as the pre and
post flight scripts still work in
Tiger and work all the way back to 10.1.
So 10.1, something called myapp.pkg.
As you can see,
especially in the scripts up there,
my app is attached to a lot
of these resource names.
and We dumped that in 10.2.
In 10.2,
packages became a real NSBundle and
they have things like an info P list
and all the resources inside of
that package have a consistent name.
This is good.
This is good because, well, first of all,
for users, if they rename that package,
it works.
It used to break.
Consistent file names are really
useful for things like automation.
And Apple localizes its software
into 15 different languages.
A nice little bonus that happened
was that by separating the
meta install flags from things
like the description and title,
now we no longer have some
of these meta install flags
accidentally localized for us.
So that was a nice little thing.
Additionally,
the payload and catalog files,
that is the bill of
materials and the archive,
changed in file name only.
So under the hood,
they're the same exact files.
So what PackageMaker does for you
is create symlinks that when you
run that package on an older system,
it's tricked into the
right thing happening.
So, some features and changes here.
In 10.2,
we added a feature called Find Files.
And Find Files is useful for updating
your application in a location
that the user may have moved it to.
We use this extensively in all
the OS updates because we only
ship parts of each application.
We don't reship mail when
we want to update it.
Just a little bit that changed.
So, we use it quite a lot.
We depend on it.
We also added the
background pictures feature,
which allows you to include custom
artwork for the installer to display.
And in 10.3,
we made that Find Files feature
a little bit easier to use.
And another notable thing for app
package authors here is that we
enhanced the Follow Sim Links feature
so that if those Sim Links point
to things on other devices,
that it works.
and on Tiger for application
package developers,
there are more features that apply to
you guys than any other OS release.
So, I also wanted to mention some
things that you should be aware
of if your application has
to work on 10.2 or earlier.
Now, these are things that
we've fixed in 10.3,
but things to keep in mind,
and we'd just like to mention
them really quickly here.
So, first of all,
when you make your root,
make it relative from slash.
In other words,
if you are creating an application,
if you are installing an application,
your root should look like root,
and then applications, and then your app.
This is as opposed to just selecting
the app as your root and changing the
default location inside of PackageMaker.
This actually gets around a
few little edge case bugs,
and is especially important if
you're using the find files feature.
What you expect would happen might
not happen if you don't do that.
Additionally,
make sure that in your root,
the permissions are correct.
It should be, you know,
1775 for your root, and so on.
This is because there's a bug
where on upgrade installs,
the state of the overwrite
permissions flag is ignored.
So,
you reinstall the package a second time,
it's going to make the permissions
be whatever was in your root,
which might not be what you want.
Additionally, meta packages do not run
the installation check tool.
So, simply include that logic inside of
a packages installation check tool.
And again, all this stuff works
in 10.3 and in Tiger.
Tiger-only packages.
You need to use the distribution scripts.
You need to use plug-ins.
You want to make sure that if
someone gets a hold of that
on a 10.3 or earlier system,
that they're not able
to install that package.
Because remember,
the 10.3 and earlier don't understand
what a distribution script is.
So what do you do?
So you include an installation
check tool that is going to
exit with an error value.
And then on Tiger,
the distribution script is
going to take precedence.
So you put your real requirements
inside of your distribution script
for your Tiger or later customers.
And on the older systems,
installation check gets run and
it just exits with an error.
And one nice thing about this
is that it doesn't require
any special strings files.
It's going to use a generic error
message built into the installer.
So it's going to be
localized for all languages.
As you can see here,
it just exit with the value 96.
Very, very simple.
It's just with bits 5 and 6 set.
So, packages that use some more advanced
features and are still compatible.
So, as I mentioned before,
you can include a distribution
script as well as installation
check and volume check scripts.
The installation check and
volume check scripts can,
of course, meet the requirements
for your 10.3 customers,
and the distribution script
is going to get run on Tiger,
and you can take advantage of
some of the more subtle controls,
like the default selection state,
for example.
Probably some of you have seen this.
Even if the installation check and
volume check script meet your needs,
you should also, or you can also,
include a distribution script,
and on Tiger systems,
it's gonna get rid of
this user interface.
So, distribution scripts, again,
are a place where custom install is,
when we talk about custom install,
we talk about distribution scripts.
So, there are a few things
to keep in mind here.
A package or a meta package
is a line item in custom
install for 10.3 and earlier.
You're going to have
to package around this.
Now, there's nothing that says that you
can't make a little bit more subtle
behavior in 10.3 or in Tiger and have
a slightly different user experience.
There's nothing wrong with that.
And also keep in mind that the check
scripts can only skip packages.
Can this package be
installed at all or not?
And, again, you can't affect the
default selection state.
So, moving on to file version checking.
File version checking provides
a really nice framework for
you to check versions of files.
Now, if you really have to check
the version of a file,
there's nothing that prevents you
today from taking advantage of the
pre- and post-flight hooks to run
your own code and do the right thing.
It's more effort, but hey,
you can still do it.
Multi-CD installation is
another great new feature.
Now, on Tiger,
you can use distribution scripts to make
everything happen and have that nice
user experience for Tiger customers.
And for pre-Tiger customers,
you can simply include extra
meta packages on each CD that
guide the user into installing.
For example, install me first .mpkg,
install me second .mpkg,
install me third .mpkg.
The important thing to remember
here is that you don't actually
have to repackage your bits.
The .pkgs are the same thing.
You're just including this extra
little thing that make it work.
[Transcript missing]
The pre-Tiger installer ignores plugins.
You can include the plugin and
it will run for Tiger customers.
What we recommend that you do is
if that UI is really important,
to move it into your
application and on first launch,
display it.
This is a really obvious use for
these plugins as some sort of
product key or serialization.
Now, you should keep in mind that someone
can always go in from either the command
line or third party tools and just
pluck the contents out of your package.
It's not secure.
It's not going to be secure in that way.
It's not a real gateway
for copy protection.
So you should move that kind
of stuff into your app anyways.
Here's a screenshot.
This is the Final Cut Express installer
and you can see some user
interface that kind of looks
like it's part of the installer.
It's not.
It's its own application.
We don't recommend that you do this,
but it is possible.
This particular example
used the volume check hook,
and the installer is just
running an executable,
so your executable can be as clever
as it needs to be to kind of pretend
that it's a part of the installer.
Again, don't do this if you can avoid it.
There are a number of edge case bugs.
It just doesn't integrate well.
So, to summarize what I've talked about,
some of the things that you should
remember to take away from this.
So, with regard to compatibility,
Packages that you made will still work.
Packages that you make in Tiger can
still work on older versions of the OS.
And this is all true if you use
PackageMaker as a starting point.
Now, it doesn't have a lot of features.
Hopefully we can add those over time,
but still use it as a starting point.
It's going to create the
basic structure of a package
that's going to be compatible.
Now,
as you saw in the 10.1 package diagram,
there are a lot of other little names
attached to the various resources,
with the exception of
preflight and postflight.
So if you use preflight and
postflight across the board,
it's going to work everywhere.
and finally you can use a mixture of
both some of the new features we've
talked about and the old features
together all in the same package.
And it's going to get you something
that will basically work out for you.
So at this point I'm going to turn
the stage back over to Jean-Pierre.
Thanks a lot.
Thank you.
So where to find documentation?
Well,
you can find documentation in two places.
Let me start with the
second one on that slide,
the software distribution document.
This does not refer to the distribution
script that we talked about today.
This is a document that we have
that explains how to create packages
and how to use PackageMaker.
This is actually on our website.
You can go ahead and download it.
It's very useful,
explains all the flags in the Info.plist.
But that's for Panther,
for 10.3 packages.
We will extend it to include
some of the Tiger features,
but it's not been updated yet.
Now we have a session download,
connect.apple.com.
If you go to the session 403,
you will find something that contains all
the examples that we showed you today.
You will find a simple example of file
version checking and how it works,
some documentation.
You will also find a few other examples.
You will also find a folder called
installer plugins that will contain the
plugins that we showed you today and the
sources and the project file for Xcode.
And you will also find in there
a distributions folder which
contains the distribution test app.
Remember that distributions do not work
with the Tiger installer right now.
So you need to use the distribution
test app and some of the examples
that you were shown today as well.
So thank you for coming for this session.
We're now going to have a Q&A.
And I will see you in a few minutes.
Thank you.
And I would like to call the
people in my group back on stage,
including Jonathan Stuecker and Aldo,
our installer tech lead.